
```agda
module Notes.Email-20250630 where
```

Hi Thorsten and Mark,

This is an update on my progress so far.

I'm trying out writing this as literate Agda to make it easier to
write the definitions, but let me know if you have any issues reading
this.

In a nutshell, I've defined things in terms of inductive Fin, but this
doesn't carry over cleanly to cubical Agda. 1Lab is working, but is
less developed that Agda's cubical library, so I'm taking a bit too
much time transferring basic definitions from Cubical Agda to 1Lab,
and this time has probably been wasted.

I proved that:
```agda
+↔⊎ : ∀ {x y} → Fin x ⊎ Fin y ≃ (Fin (x +ℕ y))
``` 

I've got as far as Lemma 1.3, but I ran into issues with my definition
of +→⊎ where the with clause shadowed some information that was needed
to check, and that was making my proofs baloon in complexity, so I
chose to go back and fix that, which required redoing ↔⊎ but I ran
into issues with proving this:

```agda
ℕ≡→Fin≡ : ∀ {x : ℕ} (a b : Fin x) → lower a ≡ lower b → a ≡ b
ℕ≡→Fin≡ {x} a b lowerEq = {!!}
```

The issue comes down to proving,

```agda
irr-subst : ∀ (x y : ℕ) → (ix : Irr (a < x)) → (iy : Irr (a < y)) → x ≡ y → ix ≡ iy
```

which isn't obvious to me how to approach this. Potentially I need to
use the dependent form of `ap`, namely `apd`:

```agda
apd : ∀ {a b} {A : I → Type a} {B : (i : I) → A i → Type b}
    → (f : ∀ i (a : A i) → B i a) {x : A i0} {y : A i1}
    → (p : PathP A x y)
    → PathP (λ i → B i (p i)) (f i0 x) (f i1 y)
apd f p i = f i (p i)
```

This doesn't make sense to me and I think that's because I'm not
thinking in terms of homotopy yet. I took some time this week to
remedy that, reading through the HoTT book and watching Robert
Harper's lecture series.

it is trivial to show that for the same holds when x and y have the
same type, so the problem isn't with Irr specifically I don't think:

```agda
irr-is-prop : (X : Type) → (x y : Irr X) → x ≡ y
irr-is-prop X a b = refl
```

1Lab does have the fact that Categories are defined cubically, without
Setoids. That may turn out to be a hinderance later on, but we'll see.

I could write things up to contribute back to 1Lab, but this would
probaly just be a further distraction from the project.

The cubical library has more definitions of Fin and more utilites for
working with them, so I would say the thing to do would be to pick one
definition of Fin that is easiest to work with.

So I've proven as far as Lemma 1.3 using the Agda standard library.
I've been porting it over to 1Lab, it seems that it would be a similar
amount of work to port it to the Agda cubical library. The main
sticking point is working with `Fin` is much harder in 1Lab because of
the way that Fin is defined. There's the following definitions of Fin:

```agda
-- Indexed inductive type
-- From agda-stdlib
data Fin : ℕ → Set where
  zero : Fin (suc n)
  suc  : (i : Fin n) → Fin (suc n)

-- Bounded naturals (with irrelevant proof)
-- From 1lab
record Fin (n : ℕ) : Type where
  constructor fin
  field
    lower       : ℕ
    ⦃ bounded ⦄ : Irr (lower < n)

-- Agda Cubical main definition
Fin n = Σ[ k ∈ ℕ ] k < n

-- Alternative definition in Agda Cubical
Fin zero = ⊥
Fin (suc n) = ⊤ ⊎ (Fin n)

-- Agda Cubical main except that <ᵗ is defined by computing the
-- trichotomy of two integers, and is either ⊤ or ⊥, making it
-- propositional.
Fin n = Σ[ k ∈ ℕ ] k <ᵗ n
```

I would just define the indexed incudtive type that I'm used to, but
it states in a comment in agda-cubical library,

```agda
-- Currently it is most convenient to define these as a subtype of the
-- natural numbers, because indexed inductive definitions don't behave
-- well with cubical Agda. This definition also has some more general
-- attractive properties, of course, such as easy conversion back to
-- ℕ.
```

which is warding me off defining it again in the standard way.

My gut says the trichotomous definition, which comes with
propositionality may be the cleanest option. There no specific reason
I can think of to care exactly how `i < x` holds, just _that_ it is
the case.

Given that choice, it would be best to move to the standard cubical library early on in the project, that seems like it would require rewriting a large amount of what I've done already, but a lot of it (maybe half) already exists in the standard cubical library, so I can just use that, and the remainded should be fairly monotonous to transoport over. Before I do that I'm going to take some time, maybe a day, to familiarise myself with the definitions of the cubical library.
